7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA
7 Analysing and Improving Transformer Model Representations with Brain Data
In my final technical chapter I move from post-hoc layerwise analysis of existing Transformer
model representations (as explored in Chapters 4, 5 and 6) to actively inducing desired representational properties. Here, I introduce a novel regularisation method, Representational Similarity
Regularisation (RSR), which is inspired by the RSA framework and aims to align Transformer
model representations with a target pattern. In this chapter I calculate the target pattern from
fMRI signals recorded in human participants who were listening to a natural language story.
My approach aims to increase the cognitive alignment of large language models, in the sense
of inducing cognitively relevant representational similarity patterns in the model activations,
directly addressing the thesis’s overarching aim of guiding model development with cognitive
signals.
I formulate a semantic textual similarity (STS) task for long text spans, with ground truth
derived from a state-of-the-art STS model, using text from a story that has accompanying fMRI
brain data. I then apply RSR to align the similarity ratings derived from the Transformer model
with the similarity between brain signals for the same text. I carry out a comprehensive range of
experiments, varying RSR’s hyperparameters, including regularisation strength, hidden vector
size of the output representation layer, batch size, learning rate, and the brain parcellation
strategy used to select relevant fMRI regions. Across these experiments, I report test correlations
for RSR models trained on each of 13 participants’ fMRI signals. My results demonstrate that
RSR leads to improved performance on both our main long-span STS task and a separate STS
benchmark when aligned with fMRI data from specific participants.
137
7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA
7.1 Introduction
In previous chapters we have used Representational Similarity Analysis to measure the correlation
between model-elicited vector representations (e.g. mean-pooled token vector representations
from BERT for a given word or token span) and a relevant ground-truth semantic or syntactic
representational dissimilarity matrix (e.g. noun-noun compound relation type). In both our
previous work and other published work on using RSA for analysing NLP models, this approach
has proven effective for generating interpretable insights into the representation of linguistic
phenomena in large language models. We now wish to use the framework of representational
similarity to directly fine-tune large language models by incorporating the correlation between
representational dissimilarity matrices into the loss function. If we take a task T (e.g. predicting
similarity between sentence pairs) with an associated loss function LT (e.g. mean-scored error
between the predicted and ground-truth sentence similarity), we expect our model to improve at
task T if we attempt to minimise LT. While training neural networks it is common practice to
introduce an additional regularisation term in order to positively influence training. Typically the
goal of regularisation is to reduce the effect of overfitting and improve the ability of the model to
generalise its predictions to unseen data. We propose Representational Similarity Regularisation
(RSR), an approach to model regularisation that penalises a model for not representing a given
second-order target pattern in its intermediate hidden vectors. We hypothesise that minimising
the representation regularisation term will also improve the model’s performance at task T if
the representational target has information relevant to accomplishing task T. For example, if we
train a multi-layer perceptron to predict house prices from the amount of rooms and the average
square-footage of all rooms, we could take the houses in the training data and construct an RDM
that represents the difference between pairs of houses based on the age of the house. If older
houses in our dataset generally have more rooms and larger rooms than the more recently built
houses, we may find that model-elicited internal representation RDM already weakly correlates
with an RDM constructed using pair-wise representations of house age. If we fine-tune these
representations to more explicitly represent the age of the house as a distributed representational
pattern across the network, we would expect that these representations would be more useful for
predicting house prices, as they have been enriched with task-relevant information. While our
proposed regularisation schema shares some similarities with multi-task learning, it differs in
its primary focus. Unlike multi-task learning, which aims to improve performance on multiple
tasks, RSR is specifically designed to enhance a model’s internal representations by aligning
138
7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA
them with a target pattern.
7.1.1 Background
Most relevant to the current work is the body of research comparing human language processing
to artificial language models. It has been extensively demonstrated that large language models
can predict brain recordings of human subjects engaging in language comprehension tasks
(Merlin & Toneva, 2022; Schrimpf et al., 2021). Prior to the advent of Transformer models,
this work mainly focused on word embeddings and recurrent neural networks. For example,
work by Wehbe et al. (2014), who found that the next word probability computed by neural
networks agrees with the brain’s own assessment of word probability, and Huth et al. (2016)
found that word embeddings derived from co-occurence information could be used to map
semantic representations across the celebral cortex using fMRI. Work by Anderson et al. (2017)
showed that text-based computational models could be used to decode fMRI activity for both
concrete and abstract concepts, while visually grounded models were only effective for concrete
ones. Later work by Jain and Huth (2018) showed that LSTM-based embeddings improved
the prediction of fMRI signals compared to earlier methods. Other research by Ruan et al.
(2016) found that skip-gram word embeddings showed significant correlations with fMRI data
from all brain lobes except the occipital lobe. More recently there has been an explosion in
the amount of research examining the extent to which Transformer models align with human
language processing (Oota et al., 2024). Goldstein et al. (2022) found that brain representations
(extracted from ECoG recording) share a similar geometric structure (i.e. the relative distances
and angles between data points in their respective high-dimensional spaces) to contextualised
embeddings extracted from a large Transformer model. Of particular relevance to the current
work is Schwartz et al. (2019) who found that fine-tuning a BERT model to predict brain activity
recordings of people reading text leads to representations that encode more brain-activity-relevant
language information.
Building upon the existing evidence and fostering alignment between human and artificial
neural networks, the current work introduces a regularisation technique that explicitly encourages
the model’s representation of natural language semantics to be more consistent with human brain
activity recording during a language comprehension task.
139
7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA
7.2 A Representational Similarity Regularisation Methodology
For a task T, we define a two-part loss function incorporating both the primary task loss LT and
the representational similarity regularisation term RRS. The final loss function is a weighted
sum of these two terms, where the weight factor determines the relative importance placed on
optimising for task-specific performance and encouraging the model’s internal representations
with the similarity structure defined by the target pattern. First, we will define the representation
similarity regularisation term:
RRS(Xb) = 1−sp(RSMθ (Xb),RSMT Pb
) (1)
where
• sp(·,·) is a differentiable implementation of Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient
• RSMθ (Xb) is the Model Representational Similarity Matrix (RSM) constructed for the
batch Xb using intermediate model representation vectors θ (e.g. intermediary hidden
vectors given input Xb)
• RSMT Pb
is the target RSM constructed using the target pattern associated with Xb
We construct the Representational Similarity Matrix for a given set of inputs X of length n
by constructing a matrix representing the cosine similarity Sc(·,·) between each pair, only taking
the upper triangle excluding the main diagonal:
RSMX =


Sc(X1,X2) ... Sc(X1,Xn)
.
.
.
.
.
.
Sc(Xn−1,Xn)


We can then minimise the following loss for a batch of inputs:
Lb = (1−λ)LT (Xb) +λRRS(Xb) (2)
where:
• LT (Xb): Task loss for the batch
140
7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA
• RRS(Xb): Representational similarity regularisation term for the batch
• λ ∈ [0,1] : Regularisation strength (weighting factor between the task loss and the representational similarity regularisation term)
7.3 Data and Methods
7.3.1 Model
During our experiments we primarily use a standard pre-trained version of BERT, bert-baseuncased. We also examine the effect of starting with another version of BERT (textattack/bertbase-uncased-STS-B) that has been pre-trained on a relevant STS task. We provide pairs of
sentences in the format of “[CLS] Sentence A [SEP] Sentence B [END]. We then extract 768-
dimensional sentence embeddings by mean-pooling over token vectors in Sentence A and
Sentence B. We then project the two sentence embeddings into a lower dimensional space. The
decision to introduce this linear projection was primarily made under the assumption that it
would be more difficult to enforce similarity constraints in higher-dimensional spaces. The final
sentence similarity is measured as the cosine similarity between these two sentence embeddings.
7.3.2 Narratives fMRI Dataset
Using our Representational Similarity Regularisation framework we will apply representational
pressure to a Transformer model in order to encourage alignment between its internal representations and a representation extracted from human brain readings. To this end, we use the
Narratives dataset (Nastase et al., 2021), which features brain scans of 345 participants as they
listened to narrative stories. We use the “Slumlord” story from the Narratives dataset. This subset
of the dataset is comprised of 18 participants (aged 18–27, mean age 21 years, 8 female). Due to
technical constraints, the present study analysed data from 13 subjects. This story is made of
2,715 words.
The fMRI recordings for the Slumlord story are segmented into a sequence of 601 functional
volumes each corresponding to a duration (repetition time, TR) of 1.5 seconds each. We follow
Kumar et al. (2024) in extracting text across windows of 20 TRs in order to retrieve longer
sections of text, providing 30 seconds of preceding context to each fMRI time-step. This results
in 581 sequences of natural text. We take the first two thirds of the story (387 sentences) as
training data and the final third (194 sentences) as the test data.
141
7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA
7.3.3 Training and Evaluation
During training, for each epoch we randomly segment our 387 sentences into batches of batch
size b, leaving us with ⌊
387
b
⌋ batches. In each of our experiments we take the primary task T as
predicting the semantic similarity between pairs of sentences in the given batch. The ground-truth
semantic similarity for each pair was pre-computed by taking the cosine-similarity between
text-embedding-ada-002 embeddings. These embeddings achieve a competitive performance
(correlation=0.82) on the SentEval 2012-2016 sentence similarity task. We based our analysis on
the preprocessing pipeline developed by Kumar et al. (2024) to handle factors like haemodynamic
lag and other neurophysiological complexities. We followed the analysis code from their publicly
available GitHub repository6
. Evaluation on the test-set is carried out on batches with the same
batch size as in training and is the correlation between the model predictions and the ground
truth semantic similarity (as measured by Pearson’s r).
7.3.4 Parcellation and Region of Interest (ROI) Filtering
Parcellation involves splitting a brain image into distinct regions for analysis, allowing researchers
to investigate functional specificity within the brain. Activity patterns in specific regions of
interest (ROIs), also called parcels, can reflect different aspects of neurocognitive function, such
as specific subprocesses of vision or linguistic representation. Brain parcellations range from
high-level segmentations (e.g. Yeo-7 with 7 regions) to very detailed views with thousands of
ROIs (e.g. DS16784). In our study, we follow Kumar et al. (2024) and use the Schaefer et al.
(2018) local-global parcellation procedure to segment the brain images into 1000 spatial parcels
after normalising the brain images to a canonical form. This relatively fine-grained approach
allows us to investigate the brain’s representation of input stimuli with a relatively rich level of
spatial detail.
The 1000 parcels from the Schaeffer parcellation scheme cover the entire cortex, including
brain regions that are unlikely to be involved in linguistic processing and therefore unlikely to
contain linguistic or semantic signal relevant to our experiments. Following the parcellation of
participant brain images into 1000 regions of interest (ROIs), we sought to refine our analysis to
focus on information most relevant to the semantic representation task. Firstly, we constructed a
ground-truth semantic similarity matrix using cosine similarity between sentence embeddings
derived from the text-embedding-ada-002 model. We then constructed an n x n representational
6https://github.com/tsumers/bert-brains
142
7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA
dissimilarity matrix (for n sentences) by taking the difference in average activity for all pairs of
sentences. We then correlated each ROI’s representational dissimilarity matrix (RDM) with this
ground truth, allowing us to rank the parcels based on their task relevance for each participant.
Finally, we aimed to identify the most informative subset of ROIs for semantic representation.
Here, we iteratively considered p top-ranked parcels (from 1 to 1000) and constructed a new
RDM by using activation values from 1 to p parcels for each sentence. These combined parcel
RDMs were then correlated with the ground truth to determine the optimal number of parcels
to include in the final representation. This procedure was repeated for all participants. The
results, presented in Figure 7.1, show a consistent pattern across participants, with the optimal
number of parcels for semantic representation converging around p=36. We also present the
participant-wise correlations between the composite parcellation RDMs and the ground-truth
semantic similarity RDM for values of p in {1,2,...,10} in Table 7.1. Here we see that the
amount of top parcels selected by our procedure to construct the final parcellation RDM (p = 36)
achieves a better correlation with the ground truth signal than simply selecting information from
only the first 10 values of p for all participants other than participant 84. For consistency in
model training and interpretation across participants, we opted to use the same number of brain
regions for all participants, even though a slightly higher correlation might have been achievable
for participant 84 using a different selection strategy. This approach ensures that all models are
enriched with a comparable amount of brain-derived information, easing interpretation when
comparing RSR when using representational target patterns from different participants.
7.3.5 Regularisation Batch Size
When employing representational similarity regularisation to train models for tasks involving
semantic representation, we must select an appropriate batch size. This choice presents a tradeoff. Larger batch sizes offer the benefit of capturing richer comparisons between various levels
of semantic similarity within the brain structure. However, this comes at the potential cost
of comparing too many sentences at once, potentially diluting the semantic similarity signal
and making it difficult to update gradients meaningfully during the training. Furthermore,
computational resources can place an upper limit on our choice of batch size, as the memory
required to process the similarity matrix for a batch scales proportionally with the square of the
batch size (n
2
).
We adopt a batch size of 5 for our experiments unless otherwise specified. This choice
143
7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA
Figure 7.1: Correlation between composite parcel RDMs and the ground-truth sentence similarity
RDMs, averaged across participants. The parcellation RDMs were constructed by ranking
individual parcel RDMs for each participant and constructing a new RDM that captures the
pair-wise dissimilarity using values in parcel 1 to n.
Subject 16 84 106 111 132 133 134 135 137 138 139 140 141
# top parcels
1 0.2 0.24 0.1 0.07 0.12 0.09 0.06 0.07 0.07 0.06 0.09 0.06 0.07
2 0.18 0.24 0.1 0.09 0.14 0.1 0.08 0.1 0.08 0.07 0.1 0.08 0.1
3 0.17 0.23 0.12 0.11 0.14 0.11 0.09 0.12 0.09 0.1 0.12 0.09 0.1
4 0.17 0.23 0.12 0.12 0.15 0.13 0.1 0.14 0.09 0.11 0.13 0.09 0.11
5 0.17 0.23 0.12 0.13 0.15 0.13 0.11 0.15 0.08 0.11 0.13 0.1 0.11
6 0.17 0.23 0.14 0.15 0.15 0.13 0.12 0.17 0.08 0.12 0.14 0.11 0.12
7 0.17 0.22 0.14 0.15 0.15 0.14 0.13 0.17 0.1 0.14 0.14 0.11 0.13
8 0.17 0.22 0.14 0.16 0.15 0.15 0.14 0.17 0.11 0.15 0.14 0.12 0.13
9 0.17 0.21 0.15 0.16 0.17 0.14 0.14 0.18 0.11 0.15 0.15 0.12 0.13
10 0.16 0.21 0.14 0.17 0.18 0.15 0.14 0.18 0.11 0.15 0.15 0.13 0.13
36 0.21 0.17 0.17 0.19 0.2 0.16 0.17 0.21 0.14 0.19 0.18 0.18 0.16
Table 7.1: Correlations between composite parcellation RDMs and the ground-truth semantic
similarity RDM. The amount of top parcels empirically selected to construct the final parcellation
RDM (n = 36) achieves a better correlation with the ground truth signal than simply selecting
information from only the top n elements in {1,2,...,10} for all participants other than participant 84.
144
7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA
was made to balance our previous considerations under the assumption that a batch size of 5
will capture a reasonable amount of semantic variation while maintaining informative gradients
for effective gradient descent optimisation and assuring computational feasibility. We design
an experiment in order to test this assumption by contrasting our chosen value with a larger
alternative.
7.3.6 Correlation Function
One requirement for RSR is the implementation of a differentiable correlation function. In
RSA, the final similarity between two models is measured by the correlation between their
representational dissimilarity matrices (RDMs). These RDMs capture the pairwise representational distances between stimuli encoded by the models. To meaningfully perform gradient
descent and update the representations in a given model such that its RDM better correlates
with a target pattern, all calculations must be differentiable. Commonly, correlation in RSA is
measured using Kendall’s tau and Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient (Nili et al., 2014).
However, the standard forms of these functions are not differentiable because ranking the data
introduces discontinuities that prevent the calculation of a smooth derivative. To address this,
we use the method proposed by Blondel et al. (2020) to calculate a differentiable variant of
Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient. They propose an efficient “soft” ranking function, which
can replace the standard ranking operation in Spearman’s r and allow gradients to flow through
the operation, enabling training via gradient descent. This soft rank function, rεΨ(θ), is defined
by the following equation:
rεΨ(θ) := PεΨ(−θ,ρ) = PΨ

−θ
ε
,ρ

(3)
Where θ ∈ R
n
is a vector of logits to be optimised by the model, and ρ := (n,n−1,...,1) is
the reversing permutation vector (i.e. a vector representing ranks in descending order, for example,
for n = 3, ρ = (3,2,1)). PΨ(z,w) is a projection that applies a strong convex regularisation, Ψ.
The parameter ε > 0 is the regularisation strength which controls the smoothness of the rank
approximation. This differentiable soft rank is then integrated into a squared loss function for
optimisation. The objective is to minimise the difference between the true ground truth ranks (r)
and the model’s predicted soft ranks (rεΨ(θ)):
L (r,θ) = 1
2
∥r −rεΨ(θ)∥
2
(4)
145
7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA
We use the version of Blondel et al.’s soft-rank implementation provided in the torchsort
library, which is a PyTorch adaptation of their original code7
. While the differentiable Spearman
correlation function has been used in training computer vision models (S. Wang & Zheng,
2023) and malware classification models (Rudd et al., 2024), our approach is the first to our
knowledge to leverage differentiable correlation functions to induce representational similarity
with a second-order target pattern.
7.3.7 Regularisation Strength
Another consideration when setting up representational similarity regularisation is the value
of the regularisation strength (previously denoted by λ). This parameter controls the relative
weight apportioned to the representational regularisation term (RRS) compared to the main loss
associated with a given task (LT ). A higher λ value increases the influence of the regularisation
term, urging the model’s internal representations to better align with the provided similarity
structure. Conversely, a lower λ value places greater emphasis on optimising the task loss,
potentially sacrificing some representational similarity for directly improving task performance.
We expect that the optimal regularisation strength value will vary depending on various factors,
including the similarity between the main task and the information captured by the target
similarity pattern, batch size, type of model, etc. Unless otherwise stated, our experiments use a
regularisation strength of λ = 0.1. This value is intended to allow the regularisation procedure to
influence the loss function while still maintaining the primary task loss as the strongest influence
on gradient updates.
7.4 Experiments and Results
We design a variety of experiments to comprehensively explore factors relating to our regularisation procedure and its influence on target task performance. These experiments manipulate
both aspects of the model architecture/training optimiser (e.g. choice of initial pre-trained BERT
model, learning rate, batch size) and components that are particular to our regularisation procedure (e.g. choice of target regularisation pattern). By systematically evaluating these conditions,
we aim to understand how they affect the model’s ability to learn the primary task while also
aligning its internal representations with human brain activity.
7The torchsort library can be found at https://github.com/teddykoker/torchsort, which adapts the original code
from https://github.com/google-research/fast-soft-sort
146
7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA
7.4.1 Experiment 1: Regularisation
Overview
Our primary experiment examines the effect that RSR has on the semantic textual similarity test
correlation across training for 13 participants. For each individual participant, we independently
trained the BERT model to minimise the mean-squared error for the predicted STS score for
a sentence pair while maximising the correspondence between model-elicited final sentence
representations and participant brain-based similarity. We used λ = 0.1 to weigh the terms in
the loss function. We use a batch size of 5, a sentence embedding vector size of 128, and a
learning rate of 0.0001. To optimise model parameters efficiently, we used the Adam optimiser
throughout the experiments (Kingma & Ba, 2017). For each participant we used activations in
the top 36 best parcels (identified with the parcellation filtering analysis described above) as
the target regularisation pattern. To establish a baseline for comparison, we also trained the
model 13 times without RSR (i.e. without any subject-specific regularisation data), averaging the
test correlation per epoch across these runs. Subsequently, we will perform 14 paired t-tests
(one per each of the 13 participants, and one for the average score across participants) to assess
whether RSR significantly impacts test performance across epochs compared to the baseline (no
RSR) runs. We hypothesise that some participants’ brain data will be more suitable for the RSR
procedure than others, as there will inevitably be variability introduced by factors such as brain
signal quality.
Results
The performance of models examined in Experiment 1 is presented in Figure 7.2 and the results of
Experiment 1 is presented in Table 7.2. P-values were corrected using the Bonferroni correction
by scaling the p-value by the number of tests carried out.
Overall we found that the average test correlation achieved when not using RSR was just
over 0.1. We find that RSR improves on this performance when using two of the participants’
brain data as representational alignment targets (participants 16 and 84). The gain in correlation
for these two participants was highly significant (p<0.01 and p<0.001, respectively, Bonferronicorrected for number of participants). The overall highest test performances were seen at
epoch 3 using RSR with participant 16’s data (correlation=0.4) and epoch 8 using data from
participant 84 (correlation=0.39). We also find that the RSR intervention significantly negatively
impacts performance when using brain data from participants 111 and 137 as target patterns. As
147
7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA
        	 
 








  
 
 
 ! 
 












 
	



Figure 7.2: Experiment One. Effect of RSR. Test correlation during training under two
conditions: (a) With Representational Similarity Regularisation (using a given participant as a
representational target pattern) (b) Without RSR
148
7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA
Participant Mean Test Correlation t-statistic p-value Corrected p-value
16 0.24 5.5 0.000 0.005**
84 0.30 11.0 0.000 0.0***
106 0.08 -1.2 0.274 3.836
139 0.05 -3.4 0.008 0.118
140 0.06 -1.5 0.166 2.325
141 0.03 -2.8 0.021 0.295
111 0.02 -4.4 0.002 0.026*
132 0.11 0.0 0.983 13.768
133 0.03 -3.9 0.004 0.053
134 0.05 -3.5 0.007 0.092
135 0.09 -0.9 0.400 5.601
137 -0.01 -3.9 0.003 0.047*
138 0.03 -3.4 0.008 0.106
Average 0.08 -1.4 0.193 2.704
Table 7.2: Results of paired t-tests carried out for Experiment One. We carry out 14 paired t-tests
comparing the test correlation for each training epoch when using RSR with a given participant’s
brain data to the average test correlation without RSR. This procedure is carried out for 13
participants and the average performance per epoch across all participants. Final p-values are
reported after Bonferroni correction. * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001
hypothesised, we have found major disparities in the performance of RSR across the participants
in our experimental cohort. These results show that representational similarity regularisation can
potentially be used to enrich the representations of neural language models with fMRI-elicited
brain activity in order to improve performance on a semantic task, though evidence for this is only
found in two participants. Therefore, it is crucial to carefully select and experimentally validate
the choice of representational target pattern when employing this regularisation technique.
7.4.2 Experiment 2: Impact of Regularisation Strength
Overview
In our second experiment we examine the effect of the regularisation strength parameter λ on the
semantic textual similarity test correlation across training for the 13 participants. Again, we train
the BERT model to minimise the mean-squared error for the predicted STS score for sentence
pairs while simultaneously maximising the alignment between model-elicited final sentence
representations and participant brain-based similarity. In our two experimental conditions we use
two different regularisation strengths: (a) λ = 0.1, and (b) λ = 0.9. This corresponds to setting
the regularisation loss’ contribution to the overall loss function to 10% and 90%, respectively.
All hyperparameters except the regularisation strength are kept the same as in Experiment 1
149
7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA
Participant Mean Test Correlation
(λ=0.1)
Mean Test Correlation
(λ=0.9) t-statistic Corrected p-value
16 0.24 0.26 -0.6 7.979
84 0.30 0.27 1.4 2.865
106 0.08 0.12 -1.7 1.762
139 0.05 0.17 -6.0 0.003**
140 0.06 0.09 -2.2 0.806
141 0.03 0.12 -6.9 0.001**
111 0.02 0.10 -5.7 0.004**
132 0.11 0.12 -0.7 7.162
133 0.03 0.08 -1.8 1.424
134 0.05 0.07 -1.3 3.06
135 0.09 0.13 -2.7 0.34
137 -0.01 0.08 -5.7 0.004**
138 0.03 0.08 -2.4 0.595
Average 0.08 0.13 -10.1 0.0***
Table 7.3: Results of paired t-tests carried out for Experiment Two. We carry out 14 paired t-tests
comparing the test correlation for each training epoch between two regularisation conditions,
(a) with λ = 0.1, and (b) with λ = 0.9. This procedure is carried out for 13 participants and
the average performance per epoch across all participants. Final p-values are reported after
Bonferroni correction. * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001
(Section 7.4.1).
After training our models for each participant under the two conditions, we conduct 14 paired
t-tests (one per each of the 13 participants, and one for the average scores across participants) to
assess whether there is a significant difference in the performance of our models using RSR
under the two regularisation strengths. We hypothesise that an excessively high λ value may
hinder test performance, as the training optimiser could prioritise the representational alignment
task at the expense of the primary STS prediction task.
Results
The performance of models under the two regularisation strengths examined in Experiment 2 is
presented in Figure 7.3 and the results of Experiment 2 is presented in Table 7.2. P-values were
corrected using the Bonferroni correction by scaling the p-value by the amount of tests carried
out.
Overall, we find that a higher regularisation strength tends to improve test performance.
The average test correlation increased for all representational target patterns except that elicited
from participant 84. This increase was significant after correction for 4 participants and for the
150
7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA
        	 
 







  
  





 








 
	






Figure 7.3: Experiment Two. Effect of Regularisation Strength. Test correlation during training
under two conditions: (a) with λ = 0.1 (b) with λ = 0.9.
average performance per epoch across all participants. While a higher regularisation strength
slightly decreased performance for participant 84 (from an average correlation of 0.3 to 0.27),
this difference was not found to be significant. These results run counter to our prior hypothesis
that test performance may be hindered by higher values of λ, demonstrating that many of
the models were able to achieve higher correlations on the primary STS task when we more
aggressively optimised for more brain-like representations of semantic similarity. Consequently,
it may be argued in retrospect that choosing 0.1 as the default regularisation strength across
our experiments was a poor choice, as the RSR intervention works better on average when this
value is 0.9. In any case, the selection of λ is much less relevant than our choice of target
representational pattern, as the best performing models were trained on data from participants 16
and 84, regardless of regularisation strength.
7.4.3 Experiment 3: Regularisation Source Hidden Size
Overview
In Experiment 3, we examine the effect that the hidden size of our model’s sentence embedding
vectors on the test correlation. As described in Section 7.3.1, our final prediction of sentence
151
7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA
        	 
 












 










 
	






Figure 7.4: Experiment Three. Effect of Hidden Vector Size. Test correlation during training
with three hidden state sizes for the model’s sentence representation: (a) h = 64, (b) h = 128
and (c) h = 256.
similarity for a pair of sentences in the cosine similarity between the sentence representations
after they are projected into a lower dimensional space. In our architecture we take this sentence
embedding vector as the regularisation target, i.e. the vector upon which we will enforce the
brain similarity constraint. In this experiment we wish to test our prior assumption that it is
easier to enforce complex similarity constraints in higher-dimensional spaces while maintaining
performance on the primary task. To this end, we consider three experimental conditions
corresponding to varying regularisation target hidden sizes: (a) h = 64, (b) h = 128, and (c)
h = 256. In all other experiments we use a hidden size h of 128. Again, all hyperparameters
with the exception of the regularisation target hidden size are kept the same as in Experiment 1
(Section 7.4.1).
Results
The test correlation scores of models trained with the three different hidden vector sizes are
presented in Figure 7.4. Overall we can see we that using the larger hidden size, h = 256,
generally leads to higher test correlations than the other two hidden sizes, and that the model
152
7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA
trained with h = 128 generally performs worse than h = 64 across most participants. As in
previous experiments, we find that participants 16 and 84 generally achieve much higher test
correlations than when we use data from any other participant. Furthermore, the results from
models regularised with data from these two participants deviate from the overall trends across
hidden vector sizes. This finding again underlines the importance for choosing and empirically
validating one’s choice of regularisation representation target pattern when employing RSR. We
note that the highest test correlations for participants 16 and 84 occur when the regularisation
target pattern has a hidden size of 128. While an argument could be made that the larger hidden
size is better for the RSR procedure, we find that focusing on results for representational target
patterns that have been shown to significantly improve performance indicates no clear preference
between a hidden size of 128 and 256.
One potential explanation for the fact that a hidden size of 256 is best when using data from
participants that generally do not yield good similarity representations for the RSR procedure
is that a greater number of hidden nodes allows the optimiser to maximise similarity within a
subset of these nodes. In this case much of the semantic representation encoded by the final layer
of the BERT model would be able to filter through to the final similarity prediction (in essence
acting a noisy dimensionality reduction). It would follow that using a smaller hidden size would
interfere with the ability to retain the dimensionally reduced semantic encoding. This could
potentially lead to catastrophic forgetting, as the model’s representation of important aspects of
semantic information is overwritten in order to prioritise the particular brain similarities elicited
by the participant’s data. In any case, future work could explore this phenomenon by training
across a large range of hidden sizes and carrying out linear decoding to measure the decodability
of the original sentence embedding and the brain similarity.
7.4.4 Experiment 4: Batch Size
Overview
Experiment 4 explores how regularisation batch size affects test correlation. As we describe
in Section 7.3.5, the choice of batch size represents a trade-off between capturing more
fine-grained comparisons between a greater diversity of brain structures with higher batch
sizes at the risk of introducing excessive noise that can obscure the signal needed for effective
gradient updates. In this experiment we employ two different batch sizes, 5 (corresponding to
10 pairwise sentence similarities computed per batch) and 10 (corresponding to 45 pairwise
153
7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA
        	 
 










 










 
	






Figure 7.5: Experiment Four. Effect of Batch Size. Test correlation during training under two
conditions: (a) with b = 5 (b) with b = 10.
sentence similarities computed per batch). Our prior assumption for this task is that a lower
batch size will capture a reasonable amount of semantic variation across participants (and
that a batch size of 10 may result in too many comparisons to yield useful gradients), leading
to the hypothesis that higher test correlations will be observed for the batch size of 5. As in
other experiments, all other hyperparameters are kept the same as in Experiment 1 (Section 7.4.1).
Results
Figure 7.5 presents the results for Experiment 4. As observed in previous experimental configurations, regularising with brain data from most participants (excluding participants 16 and 84)
resulted in a trend of higher test correlations with the larger batch size (b=10) across training
epochs. This suggests that for most participants, the increased number of comparisons in the
larger batch captured more task-relevant information, leading to better model performance.
Furthermore, we again find that for models regularised on this set of participants’ data the
highest test correlations were measured at epoch 0, i.e. with the least amount of fine-tuning. In
contrast, we see that the highest test correlations for the models regularised using brain data
from participants 84 and 16 (occurring at epochs 8 and 3, respectively) are achieved using the
154
7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA
lower batch size of 5. The fact that the highest overall test correlations were seen using the lower
batch size aligns with our prior assumption that regularising with the batch size of 5 provides
enough similarity information to provide meaningful gradients when the RSR procedure has an
appropriate representational target pattern i.e. data from participants 16 and 84.
7.4.5 Experiment 5: Learning Rate Magnitude
Overview
In this experiment, we investigate the impact of the initial learning rate on model performance
during representational similarity regularisation. Although the Adam optimiser we use adjusts
the learning rate during training, the initial value will significantly influence the trajectory of
the optimisation process. Our hypothesis is that this particular implementation of RSR will
benefit more from a lower initial learning rate than a higher rate. A lower learning rate allows for
more gradual updates to the model parameters, potentially enabling better integration of the
fine-grained semantic similarity information provided by the brain data. We compare our default
initial learning rate of 0.0001 to a higher rate of 0.01 to evaluate this hypothesis.
Results
Figure 7.6 shows the test correlation during training with RSR given different participants’ brain
similarity patterns under two different learning rates, 0.0001 and 0.01. As expected, the initial
learning rate magnitude has a strong influence on performance. For most participants we find
that the higher learning rate (0.01) leads to lower correlations with the held out test similarity
scores, with most correlations lying between -0.1 and 0.1.
In contrast, the lower learning rate of 0.0001 generally leads to higher test correlations,
particularly for participants 16 and 84. Models regularised using these participants again achieve
substantially better results compared to using other target patterns (which generally show a
decline in performance after the first epoch). This finding reinforces the importance of selecting
both a high-quality target pattern and appropriate parameterisation for successfully implementing
representational similarity regularisation.
7.4.6 Experiment 6: Parcellation Strategy
Overview
In Section 7.3.4 we describe our methodology for ranking each subject’s brain parcels according
155
7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA
        	 
 





















 
	






Figure 7.6: Experiment Five. Effect of Learning Rate. Test correlation during training under
two conditions: (a) with α = 0.01 (b) with α = 0.0001.
to how relevant they are for the task of measuring semantic similarity which led us to selecting 36
as the number of parcels to consider when generating our similarity matrices. In Table 7.1 we can
see the disparity in correlation between the composite parcellation RDMs and the ground-truth
semantic similarity RDM across different participants, with participants 16 and 84 having a
relatively high correlation with just one top parcel before gradually becoming less correlated
with increasing numbers of parcels (although this decrease in correlation is recovered by 36
parcels for participant 16). Despite the fact that the composite parcellation RDMs generated from
most participants’ brain data using 36 top parcels correlates better with the ground truth signal
than that of participant 84, we find that regularising our models with data from participant 84
consistently leads to better test correlations than these other models. This emerging trend leads
us to question how our parcellation strategy is related to test correlation. We are particularly
interested in whether our models may benefit from being enriched with similarity information
from additional parcels, and to what extent model performance will degrade if different subsets
of parcels are used for generating brain RSMs.
As such, we have designed Experiment 6 to investigate test correlation in RSR under three
different parcellation strategies, (a) using the top 36 correlated parcels per participant (the
156
7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Epoch
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Test Correlation
Parcellation Strategy
Top 36
Random 36
All 1000
Participant
16
84
106
111
132
133
134
135
137
138
139
140
141
Figure 7.7: Experiment Six. Effect of Parcellation Strategy. Test correlation during training
under three different parcellations: (a) using the top-36 correlated parcels, (b) using a random 36
parcels, and (b) using all 1000 parcels.
157
7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA
default strategy used across other experiments), (b) using 36 random parcels, and (c) using all
1000 available parcels. We expect test correlation to remain highest under condition (a), and that
a random parcellation strategy will lead to substantially worse correlations on the held out test
set. We also expect that using all 1000 parcels will result in worse results as noise is introduced
from parts of the brain that are functionally unrelated to linguistic or semantic processing.
Results
The results for Experiment 6 are presented in Figure 7.7. For readability, we have grouped
together test correlations for all participants except for participants 16 and 84, which are plotted
separately on the figure.These results follow the same trend as in previous experiments, with
participants 16 and 84 standing out as having much higher test correlations across several
conditions compared to all other participants. We can see that even the models regularised using
a random 36 parcels from these two participants can outperform the average test correlation
for all other participants when the top 36 parcels are selected. For models regularised on brain
similarity data from participants 16 and 84 there is a clear preference for using only the top
36 parcels, followed by the strategy of creating RSMs using all 1000 parcels, with the models
trained using information from 36 random parcels having substantially lower test correlations.
This indicates that when we use RSR with an fMRI-based target pattern we should select a small
subset of parcels that are particularly enriched with task-relevant information, rather than using
similarity information from all parcels. This is due to the latter strategy introducing noise from
brain regions that are not relevant to semantic processing. Unexpectedly, we did not find a clear
preference in parcellation strategy for participants other than 16 and 84, with performance being
poor across the three conditions and generally getting worse with further training epochs. This
suggests that for participants whose brain data is not inherently well-suited to RSR, the specific
parcellation strategy will not have a significant impact on performance.
7.4.7 Experiment 7: Fine-tuning STS-BERT
Overview
We designed Experiment 7 to investigate the effect of using a version of BERT that was
fine-tuned for semantic similarity tasks. We predict that fine-tuning a model that has been
pre-trained on a semantic textual similarity task, such as STS-BERT, will provide a better
starting point for further fine-tuning on sentence pairs from the Narratives story compared
158
7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA
       	 
 
 





 
 !!





!!
	

 
	



 






 
 
Figure 7.8: Experiment Seven. Effect of fine-tuning on a version of BERT specialised in STS.
The two training conditions are: (a) trained on BERT, and (b) trained on STS-BERT.
to the baseline BERT model. By building on pre-existing knowledge of semantic similarity,
we expect the fine-tuned STS-BERT model to perform better under our proposed RSR framework.
Results
Figure 7.8 presents the results for Experiment 7. Consistent with previous experiments, participants 16 and 84 do not follow the trend exhibited by other participants. Models regularised
using similarity patterns elicited from the other participants clearly favour the pre-trained STS
model. Experiment 7 is the first instance where models regularised using data from participants
other than 16 and 84 achieve competitive results with models regularised using data from these
two participants (in particular, participants 134 and 140 demonstrate strong performance in the
final epochs). This outcome suggests that RSR can function effectively even with relatively poor
representational targets, provided that the initial model is well suited to the particular target task.
While we found some broad evidence for our initial hypothesis that a model pre-trained
on task-relevant information would perform better under the RSR framework compared to
using the baseline model, the results for participants 16 and 84 deviate from this trend. This
discrepancy could potentially be partly explained by a form of catastrophic forgetting. The
159
7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA

 

 

 

 
        	 
 
  



 

 

 


Figure 7.9: Experiment Eight. Bar plot showing highest correlation across epochs for each
participant under two conditions: (a) without RSR (mean performance across 13 runs, and (b)
with RSR.
process of imposing the similarity structure elicited from participant brain information could
potentially inadvertently undo the model’s embedding of task-relevant information that was
conferred by the fine-tuning process. Furthermore, it may be the case that the two positive signals
(the task-relevant regularisation structure extracted from participants 16/84, and the pre-trained
STS knowledge) could be competing for influence, hindering the model’s ability to leverage both
effectively. Conversely, for participants with potentially noisier or less task-relevant similarity
structures, the pre-trained model might have more freedom to extract the fine-tuned information
directly.
7.4.8 Experiment 8: Relationship between Similarity Prediction Performance and STS-B
performance under RSR
Overview
Across our experiments we have measured performance as the correlation between the model’s
prediction of semantic similarity between pairs of sentences within a held-out test-set (i.e. the
final third of the “Slumlord” story). As all sentence pairs originate from the same story, we
may predict that our models will overfit to the particular semantic space that is covered by this
160
7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA
story. Furthermore, the fact that we extract 20 TRs of context prior to a particular fMRI image
means that each of our sentence pairs are actually 30 second snippets of text, amounting to short
paragraphs rather than distinct sentences, further separating our task from a typical STS task.
These two factors lead us to the hypothesis that our models will not perform well on a typical
STS task, as it would be difficult for models trained on such long and thematically similar text
snippets to generalise to a generic STS task. As such, across all experimental trials we have also
evaluated our models on the STS-Benchmark task. To keep inference consistent with how our
models have been trained to predict similarity for batches of sentences, we constructed batches
of STS-B sentence pairs from the validation set of the GLUE benchmark. At the end of each
epoch of training, we predict the similarity across each of these batches, concatenate predictions
and evaluate performance using Pearson’s r.
As part of this experiment we are interested in investigating whether representational
similarity regularisation helps prevent models from overfitting, as these models must both predict
semantic similarity for pairs of text snippets while also enforcing structural constraints on its internal representations such that they align with human brain similarity information. We expect that
this constraint will make our models more robust and thus perform better on the STS-Benchmark.
Results
In Figure 7.9, we present the results for Experiment 8. The figure shows STS correlation for two
conditions: (a) the mean-pooled correlations across 13 runs without RSR, and (b) the maximum
correlation achieved across epochs for each model.
Across the models we evaluated, we observe maximum correlations on the STS-B task in the
range of 0.1 to 0.2. These scores are considerably lower than both the highest scores achieved
on our primary semantic similarity task (around 0.35 to 0.4) and those typically reported for
models trained specifically on the STS-B dataset. This is unsurprising, as our models were
trained on a different kind of semantic similarity task involving longer and thematically similar
text snippets, and thus would not be expected to generalise well to a standard STS-B benchmark.
Of the 13 models, 12 showed a decrease in STS-B performance when we applied the
regularisation constraint. The only model that improved correlation after applying RSR was
the model regularised on participant 84’s data, which was one of two models that consistently
outperform all other models. This may indicate that RSR can improve generalisation to related
tasks given the right representational target. While this result (i.e. that the strongest model would
161
7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA
also perform relatively well on an STS task) was not surprising, it was somewhat unexpected
that the model regularised on participant 16’s target pattern did not yield similar results on
the ancillary STS task. That model’s performance, a correlation of 0.15, was on par with
several other models, including the model regularised using participant 111’s target pattern which
performed slightly better. One potential clue for the reason behind this disparity could be offered
by Table 7.3.4, where we saw that the top parcels in participant 84’s data revealed particularly
high correlation with the ground-truth semantic similarity, reaching much higher correlations
than participant 16. Based on those results we argue that participant 84’s brain similarity patterns
reveal a particularly strong alignment with the semantic similarity task, and that this alignment
leads to representations of semantic similarity that generalise to a typical STS task.
All in all, these results support our first prediction that our models would show limited
generalisability to a typical STS task. Our findings regarding the effectiveness of RSR in
promoting generalisability are mixed. For one of the models that benefitted from RSR in our
primary task (participant 84), we see a substantial increase in STS-B correlation, suggesting
that RSR helped reduce overfitting to the primary task for this model. However, for models that
did not benefit from RSR in the primary task, the regularisation procedure tended to either not
improve performance or activity harm performance on the STS-B task.
7.4.9 Principal Findings
Across our experiments, we have evaluated our novel approach of using representational similarity
regularisation to inject human-derived semantic information into the representational structure
of transformer models. We note several key trends:
(1) RSR can improve fine-tuning transformer models for the task of predicting semantic
similarity for long sentence pairs. This demonstrates that our reframing of the RSA framework
as a regularisation technique has successfully allowed us to gone beyond interpretation and can
be used improve deep neural networks with data from cognitive science. While this was primarily
observed for a subset of models in Experiment 1, it suggests the potential for further exploration
to broaden the applicability of RSR across different transformer architectures and tasks.
(2) It is important to select an appropriate representational target. We found that using
data from two participants (participants 16 and 84) worked very well for improving average
performance on our task. Furthermore, this finding is quite robust across many experiments,
where we consistently found these two models to perform best under different parameterisations.
162
7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA
This again highlights how crucial it is to choose an appropriate representational target when
employing RSR. Particular to fMRI data, part of this process of selecting the target pattern will
involve a careful analysis of information within the particular parcellation chosen, resulting in
selecting the correct amount of information used to maximise semantic signal and reduce noise.
Further work is required to better understand the data quality and representational richness of the
fMRI data across participants, and how this may interact with the utility of the regularisation
signal used in RSR.
(3) RSR can improve generalisation to related tasks when an appropriate representational target is selected. This result was found in Experiment 8, where a target pattern elicited
by participant 84’s brain data was used to regularise a model that improved performance on an
STS benchmark. However, we note that this pattern does not hold across participants in general.
7.5 Limitations and Future Work
The current work introduces a method for aligning representational patterns in the hidden vectors
of a neural network given a set of stimuli with a target representational pattern constructed from
the same stimuli in a separate modality. One limitation of the current work is that the setting
of our experimental design is complex, potentially inhibiting our ability to evaluate the effect
of the regularisation intervention due to factors introduced by the tasks and data that we use.
In particular, we recognise the relative complexity of (1) the neural networks that we subject
to this regularisation process (i.e. large Transformer models), (2) the task that we use for the
primary loss calculation (semantic textual similarity of large sequences of text), and (3) the target
pattern used to regularise our Transformer models (fMRI data elicited in a natural language
comprehension task). For the current work, we chose this particular class of models as we
are interested in developing methods for analysing and improving the linguistic capabilities of
large language models, and Transformer models represent the state of the art across a variety
of natural language processing tasks. We chose to train these models on a semantic textual
similarity task as we have used STS in previous chapters as a robust measure of the broad
semantic representational ability of these models, and furthermore this task has broad use-cases
in language technology. We chose to regularise the models’ representations using fMRI data
as we are interested in assessing whether improving the alignment between cognitive data and
a models’ representations (e.g. similarity to semantic representations generated by the human
brain) leads to improved performance on a real world NLP task.
163
7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA
Despite the relative complexity of these experimental features, we are still able to find
evidence that our approach to regularising Transformer models using representational similarity
alignment improves model performance on a related downstream STS task (when we regularise
using a particular representational target pattern, subject 84). In any case, future work will
address concerns regarding the complexity of our experimental set-up by (1) simplifying the
neural network model that we use (e.g. using a feedforward neural network with one hidden
layer), (2) by using a simpler primary loss task (e.g. a regression task with a low-dimensional
numeric input, such as house-price estimation from sq-footage and number of rooms), and
(3) a simpler target representational target pattern (such as a sparse matrix with dimensions
corresponding to whether or not a particular house has a particular feature). By making these
changes future studies can more effectively isolate the specific contributions of our proposed
regularisation schema, leading to more interpretable and generalisable experimental results.
Another limitation of the current work is the restricted scope of stimuli used. By focusing
solely on the Slumlord story from the Narratives fMRI dataset we may have limited the range
of semantic representations captured, potentially impacting the generalisability of our findings.
While the Slumlord story does offer a degree of internal semantic variance, we anticipate that a
broader range of semantic stimuli would allow us to both identify more effective regularisation
targets and improve the representational similarity matrices for participants examined in the
current work. In particular, we expect that models that have been regularised using a broader
range of semantic stimuli would generalise better to a generic downstream STS task. Additionally,
the noise inherent in fMRI data, which can be mitigated by using a larger dataset with multiple
stories and additional participants, may have limited the effectiveness of our regularisation
procedure. By expanding the scope of our analysis we could potentially identify higher-quality
representational target patterns that are more robust to noise (such as participants 16 and 84
from the current work). Due to practical constraints, we were unfortunately unable to include
more stories in the current study. Future research should particularly aim to include the “Reach
for the Stars One Small Step at a Time” story, recorded from the same participants during the
same session, to enhance the diversity of semantic representations. By expanding the fMRI
data associated with each participant in this manner we can significantly improve the semantic
representational target pattern by including additional pairwise comparisons, not only between
sentences within the new story but also between sentences from the “Slumlord” story and the
new story.
164
7 ANALYSING AND IMPROVING TRANSFORMER MODEL REPRESENTATIONS
WITH BRAIN DATA
7.6 Conclusion
This chapter introduced a novel methodology, Representational Similarity Regularisation (RSR),
directly addressing the thesis’s final research question of whether actively encouraging the
alignment of Transformer model representations with cognitive data lead to improved model
effectiveness. Inspired by RSA, RSR allows us to actively align Transformer model representations with a given target signal. In this chapter we chose the rather ambitious goal of aligning
Transformer models with human-derived signals, specifically fMRI brain data elicited by natural
language. Across a variety of experiments we sought to determine if such alignment could
enhance model performance on a long-form STS task, moving beyond the purely interpretative
applications of cognitive science methods explored in earlier chapters.
Our investigation demonstrated that RSR can indeed improve the fine-tuning of Transformer
models for predicting semantic similarity in long sentence pairs, and can enhance generalisation capabilities to related tasks when an appropriate representational target is selected. We
consistently found that data from specific participants (16 and 84) yielded the most effective
regularisation, indicating the importance of selecting the appropriate cognitive target signals.
These results provide a tentative affirmative answer to the thesis’ final research question, showing
the potential of using cognitive signals to build more human-aligned deep neural networks for
natural language processing. However, we note that further work is needed to validate the RSR
methodology, for example in toy experimental setups with simpler, noise-free regularisation
signal.
165